Docs 4864/asm user tracking updates (#16876)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/security/application_security/threats/add-user-info.md

## Overview

Instrument your services and track user activity to detect and block bad actors.

> Add authenticated user information on traces to identify and block bad actors targeting your authenticated attack surface. The authenticated user monitoring and blocking is done by setting the user id tag on the running Application Performance Monitoring (APM) trace. It also provides the necessary instrumentation for ASM to block authenticated attackers. This allows ASM to associate attacks and business logic events to users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add authenticated user information on traces to identify and block bad actors targeting your authenticated attack surface. To do this, set the user ID tag on the running APM trace, providing the necessary instrumentation for ASM to block authenticated attackers. This allows ASM to associate attacks and business logic events to users.
```

> Track user logins to detect account takeovers with out of the box detection rules, and ultimately block attackers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Track user logins to detect account takeovers with out-of-the-box detection rules, and to ultimately block attackers.
```

{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Adding user events (login success, login failure, any business logic) to traces

{{< programming-lang-wrapper langs="java,dotnet,go,ruby,php,nodejs,python" >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="java" >}}

> Use the the Java tracer's API to track user events, released in dd-trace-java v1.8.0. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-java v 1.8.0, you can use the the Java tracer's API to track user events. 
```

> The example below shows how to track login events, as well as custom events (using signup as an example)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples show how to track login events or custom events (using signup as an example).
```

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab "login success" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab "Login success" %}}
```

```java
import datadog.trace.api.EventTracker;
import datadog.trace.api.GlobalTracer;

public class LoginController {

    private User doLogin(String userId, String password) {
        // this is where you get User based on userId/password credentials
        User user = checkLogin(userId, password);

        Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
        metadata.put("email", user.getEmail());

        // track user authentication success events
        GlobalTracer
            .getEventTracker()
            .trackLoginSuccessEvent(user.getId(), metadata);

    }
}

```
{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "login failure" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab "Login failure" %}}
```

```java
import datadog.trace.api.EventTracker;
import datadog.trace.api.GlobalTracer;

public class LoginController {

    private User doLogin(String userId, String password) {
        // this is where you get User based on userId/password credentials
        User user = checkLogin(userId, password);

        // if function returns null - user doesn’t exist
        boolean userExists = (user != null);
        Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
        if (userExists != null) {
            metadata.put("email", user.getEmail());
        }

        // track user authentication error events
        GlobalTracer
            .getEventTracker()
            .trackLoginFailureEvent(userId, userExists, metadata);
    }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "custom business logic" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```

{{< /programming-lang-wrapper >}}

## Adding user events (login success, login failure, any business logic) to traces

{{< programming-lang-wrapper langs="java,dotnet,go,ruby,php,nodejs,python" >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="java" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-java v1.8.0, you can use the the Java tracer's API to track user events. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-java v1.8.0, you can use the Java tracer's API to track user events. 
```

        // if function returns null - user doesn’t exist
        boolean userExists = (user != null);
        Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
        if (userExists != null) {
            metadata.put("email", user.getEmail());
        }

        // track user authentication error events
        GlobalTracer
            .getEventTracker()
            .trackLoginFailureEvent(userId, userExists, metadata);
    }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```java
import datadog.trace.api.EventTracker;
import datadog.trace.api.GlobalTracer;

public class LoginController {

    private User doSignup(String userId, String email) {
        // this is where you create your user account
        User user = createUser(userId, email);

        Map<String, String> metadata = new HashMap<>();
        metadata.put("email", user.getEmail());
        metadata.put("id", user.getId());

        // track user signup events
        GlobalTracer
            .getEventTracker()
            .trackCustomEvent("signup", metadata);
    }
}

```
{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="dotnet" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-dotnet v2.23.0, you can use the the .NET tracer's API to track user events. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-dotnet v2.23.0, you can use the .NET tracer's API to track user events. 
```

```csharp
using Datadog.Trace.AppSec;

void OnLogonSuccess(string userId, ...)
{
    // metadata is optional
    var metadata = new Dictionary<string, string>()
    {
        { "customKey", "customValue" }
    };
    EventTrackingSdk.TrackUserLoginSuccessEvent(userId, metadata);

    // ...
}

```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Login failure" %}}
```csharp
using Datadog.Trace.AppSec;

void OnLogonFailure(string userId, bool userExists, ...)
{
    // metadata is optional
    var metadata = new Dictionary<string, string>()
    {
        { "customKey", "customValue" }
    };
    EventTrackingSdk.TrackUserLoginFailureEvent(userId, userExists, metadata);

    // ...
}
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```csharp
void OnUserSignupComplete(string userId, ...)
{
    // the metadata parameter is optional, but adding the "usr.id"
    var metadata = new Dictionary<string, string>()
    {
        { "usr.id", userId }
    };
    // Leveraging custom business logic tracking to track user signups
    EventTrackingSdk.TrackCustomEvent("users.signup", metadata);

    // ...
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="go" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-go v1.47.0, you can use the the Go tracer's API to track user events. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-go v1.47.0, you can use the Go tracer's API to track user events. 
```

  metadata := /* optional extra event metadata */
  userdata := /* optional extra user data */

  // Track login success
  if appsec.TrackUserLoginSuccessEvent(r.Context(), "my-uid", metadata, userdata) != nil {
    // The given user id is blocked and the handler should be aborted asap.
    // The blocking response will be sent by the appsec middleware.
    return
  }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Login failure" %}}
```go
import "gopkg.in/DataDog/dd-trace-go.v1/appsec"

func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
  exists := /* whether the given user id exists or not */
  metadata := /* optional extra event metadata */ 
  appsec.TrackUserLoginFailureEvent(r.Context(), "my-uid", exists, metadata)
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```go
import "gopkg.in/DataDog/dd-trace-go.v1/appsec"

func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
  metadata := map[string]string{"usr.id": "my-uid"}

  // Leveraging custom business logic tracking to track user signups
  appsec.TrackCustomEvent(r.Context(), "users.signup", metadata)
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="ruby" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-rb v1.9.0, you can use the the Ruby tracer's API to track user events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-rb v1.9.0, you can use the Ruby tracer's API to track user events.
```

The following examples show how to track login events or custom events (using signup as an example).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Login success" %}}
```ruby
require 'datadog/kit/appsec/events'

trace = Datadog::Tracing.active_trace
Datadog::Kit::AppSec::Events.track_login_success(trace, user: { id: 'my_user_id' })
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Login failure" %}}
```ruby
require 'datadog/kit/appsec/events'
trace = Datadog::Tracing.active_trace

# if the user id exists
Datadog::Kit::AppSec::Events.track_login_failure(trace, user_id: 'my_user_id', user_exists: true)

# if the user id doesn’t exist
Datadog::Kit::AppSec::Events.track_login_failure(trace, user_id: 'my_user_id', user_exists: false)
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```ruby
require 'datadog/kit/appsec/events'
trace = Datadog::Tracing.active_trace

# Leveraging custom business logic tracking to track user signups
Datadog::Kit::AppSec::Events.track('users.signup', trace)
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="php" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-php v0.84.0, you can use the the PHP tracer's API to track user events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-php v0.84.0, you can use the PHP tracer's API to track user events.
```

The following examples show how to track login events or custom events (using signup as an example).

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Login success" %}}
```php
<?php
\datadog\appsec\track_user_login_success_event($id, $exists, ['email' => $email])
?>
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Login failure" %}}
```php
<?php
\datadog\appsec\track_user_login_failure_event($id, ['email' => $email])
?>
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```php
<?php
\datadog\appsec\track_custom_event(‘signup’, [‘id’ => $id, 'email' => $email]);
?>
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

{{< /programming-lang >}}
{{< programming-lang lang="nodejs" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-js v3.13.1, you can use the the NodeJS tracer's API to track user events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-js v3.13.1, you can use the NodeJS tracer's API to track user events.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Login success" %}}
```javascript
const tracer = require('dd-trace')

// in a controller:
const user = {
  id: 'user-id', // id is mandatory
  email: 'user@email.com' // other fields are optional
}
const metadata = { custom: 'value' } // optional metadata with arbitrary fields

// Log a successful user authentication event
tracer.appsec.trackUserLoginSuccessEvent(user, metadata) // metadata is optional
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Login failure" %}}
```javascript
const tracer = require('dd-trace')

// in a controller:
const userId = 'user-id'
const userExists = true // if the user login exists in database for example
const metadata = { custom: 'value' } // optional metadata with arbitrary fields

// metadata is optional
tracer.appsec.trackUserLoginFailureEvent(userId, userExists, metadata)
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Custom business logic" %}}
```javascript
const tracer = require('dd-trace')

// in a controller:
const eventName = 'users.signup'
const metadata = { 'usr.id': 'user-id' }

tracer.appsec.trackCustomEvent(eventName, metadata)
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

{{< /programming-lang >}}

{{< programming-lang lang="python" >}}

> Starting in dd-trace-py v1.9.0, you can use the the Python tracer's API to track user events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in dd-trace-py v1.9.0, you can use the Python tracer's API to track user events.
```
